Well, hello, everyone, and welcome.
I'd like to welcome all of you.
Look at this room.
I mean, there are so many of you here.
You guys are -- I just
perhaps want to start,
congratulate all of you.
You're here at the birth of a
new industry for the iPhone.
So give yourselves a round of applause.
So my name is Allan Schaffe,
I'm Apple's Graphics
Technology Evangelist.
In a few minutes,
I'll be joined by Kevin,
who's a graphics engineer with
us and one of the authors of the
Touch Fighter demo that you may
have seen around the show earlier.
Yeah, sure.
Go ahead.
[Transcript missing]
All right.
Also, another element of the iPhone
is the ability to do networking.
And you've seen this.
And so this is something that has
a direct applicability for sort of
classic games like chess and checkers,
backgammon,
all those kinds of games where
you're competing against an opponent.
But then likewise,
just the ability to have big
multiplayer games is available to
you on the iPhone or with the iPhone.
And so, you know,
I can start to imagine games coming
out where you're competing in a sports
arena or a multi-level dungeon or at
a poker table or some other kind of
game where you're competing against
or with or against multiple opponents.
The iPhone has the ability
to know its current location.
This is something that games haven't
really taken advantage of in the
past because console games are
plugged into your television set,
and your computer games are probably
on your desk or on your laptop.
But just the ability to have a
game that knows its location maybe
expands the realm of games that
you can do beyond just simply
porting a game over to the iPhone.
Think in terms of new capabilities
that you might be able to put
into a game that you have,
or new ideas.
The first thing that comes to mind
with a lot of location-based games
are sort of like treasure hunts.
But imagine any kind of a game that
you're able to change the gameplay.
Depending on where the user is.
And that opens up a whole
new realm of possibilities.
And I think it's a territory that
hasn't really been captured yet,
and so there's a lot of opportunity
for you as developers to do that.
I've mentioned, you know,
kind of going over to
the technology side,
the high-resolution display.
So, you know, the iPhone,
it has a big display, it's bright,
it's high contrast, 160 DPI,
the resolution is 320 by 480.
And so, you know, when we've been working
with mobile developers,
they're looking at that and going like,
wow, this is great.
You know,
they're scaling up their artwork,
they're adding complexity
into their gameplay.
And then likewise,
kind of related to this,
the whole thing is being
driven by a screaming fast GPU.
And I think you saw yesterday
during the keynote some of the
examples there of just very,
very powerful graphics.
We're going to be talking about
OpenGL ES in just a moment,
and so we'll be showing you
a bit about how that's done.
A number of media technologies
are available in the iPhone SDK,
and in this session, really,
what we're going to be talking about are
those topics that I've just mentioned.
So input, networking,
and then things that you see here.
And so OpenGL ES for 3D graphics,
Core Audio, and OpenAL for audio
playback and recording,
and the Media Player Framework
for full-screen video playback,
especially for cut scenes.
In this particular session,
we're not going to have time to get
into Quartz 2D or Core Animation.
Those are things that you would
typically be using perhaps for a 2D game.
And so -- but there's a
lot of sessions here at the
conference about those as well.
We're just going to be screaming
through a lot of different topics.
So if you had a chance to see
the iPhone SDK launch event that
took place a few months ago,
the demo that we showed
there was one that,
as I said, was developed by Kevin and
some of his colleagues.
We called it Touch Fighter,
and this is a space fighting game.
It took about two weeks to put together.
Kevin has had a little more
time to work on it since then,
and so here at the show,
we're going to be showing you, of course,
Touch Fighter 2 today in this session.
And this is really the example that
we're using to demonstrate a lot
of the capabilities in the SDK.
And so with that,
I'd like to bring up Kevin to
show you Touch Fighter 2.
Thanks, Sebastian.
Yeah.
Thank you, Alan.
So the iPhone is a fantastic
platform for games.
And this is because you have this unique
set of features that Alan just presented.
And so it makes it a great
target for game play innovation.
And so what we try to do in TouchFader
was to take most of this feature in a
demo and to see how far we could go.
So I'm going to demonstrate in details
what we have behind TouchWater 2.
Let me go on the demo unit.
Okay, can we go to the demo machine,
please?
Okay, thank you.
So here we are.
So we have a new multiplayer mode
that we're not going to demo now,
but maybe later.
So I'm going to start as a single player.
And so here you see Touch Fader.
You see these beautiful graphics.
And so how do I control the ship?
So I steer and I use the accelerometer
to steer and move around.
And so it's very nice
and it's very responsive.
It's smooth yet.
It's responsive.
It's very nice to control,
very nice way to control
the ship and very intuitive.
So to fire now,
I can simply tap the screen.
So I tap on the right side of the
screen to fire from the right.
I tap from the left side of the
screen to fire from the left.
And you know, that's kind of fun.
So you see, you can hear right now,
sorry, the 3D positional sound.
So as I go around,
the thrust of the ship gets
panned and specialized via OpenAL.
So in the same way,
the lasers get panned and specialized.
The explosions are also located in space.
So it's a very nice and it's
a very immersive experience.
So I can do that.
So what we did also in Touch Fader
is to integrate gestures to target
specific moves and special moves.
So for instance,
if I do an up swipe here,
I'm throwing directly at missiles.
And that's stunning.
It's really nice.
Again, I send the missiles from the left,
I hear from the right.
It's very intuitive.
You see these amazing graphics,
all these particle systems going on.
I'm on fire,
but because it's a demo game and
I can die and there's just one level,
I'm not really scared about that.
So here you go.
So you can also bring UI kit views,
so a scenic space where
I can put some information.
For instance, here,
let me show the frame per second
counter and some gesture data.
And what you can see is that even
with all this graphic and all
this blending and stuff going on,
we're still pretty steady
at 30 frames per second.
So it's very nice.
It's a very powerful
GPU that we have here.
And you see this little mark here
that allows me to debug gesture,
for instance.
So some of the things we
did in Touch Fader is to add
some ability to calibrate.
So for instance,
here I'm in that location,
but I might want to change
position as I play the game.
So for instance, if I sit,
so I can go over here,
and Touch Fader automatically detects
that you're in a new location under
a new inclination and recalibrates.
So it's very nice to allow
your gamer to do that,
and we'll go more in detail on
how we did that and discuss that
matter later in the presentation.
So...
So now I can do the final move that
leads me directly to the end of
that one level demo game by doing a
two finger upswipe that is sending
me directly to the end sequence.
So you have a clean transition,
and here you have right now an X264
movie playing right up in the game.
So no PngR, X264 movie as a cutscene,
and here I have some advice from Apple.
OK.
And I tap the screen.
I have high scores.
So here again, some view.
I can tap my name,
and a keyboard shows up,
so I can change eventually.
So here, that's a good one.
I'm at rank two.
I'm the only one better
than Steve in that game.
So yeah.
So here you go.
That's "Dash Powder 2."
So we learned a lot in
doing TouchFatter 2.
And so it's a great integrator
of all these great iPhone
features and technologies.
And so we say, well,
it'd be great if you could share what
we learned so you can-- and hopefully
it's going to help you in your own games.
So what we're going to
do today here at WGBC,
we're going to make the
TouchFatter source available.
Thank you.
So hopefully, we hope you like it and
you'll be able to find what's,
you know,
some content that you can include
and integrate in your own games.
And so what we're going to do today
is that we're going to go through all
the basics of the iPhone technologies
and APIs to get you started in
doing your games on the iPhone that
leverage all these key technologies.
And we're going to point
you to relevant sample code,
so to the APIs, to relevant sample code,
and to locations within the
Touch Fighter source that
are relevant and that serves
the purpose we're discussing.
So first, let me talk about drawing.
So drawing is the first thing you do,
first thing you want to
do generally in a game.
And you have lots of different
drawing APIs on the iPhone that
targets each specific needs that
you might have in your game.
So the one you're already
familiar with is UIKit.
So UIKit is this API and framework
responsible for all these nice
controls and views on the phone.
And it's built over Quartz
2D and core animation.
So Quartz 2D is this API that
does 2D graphic generation,
so text and lines and
gradients and are anti-aliased,
so it looks very nice,
and also PDF support.
And core animation is the
low-level API that's responsible
for this fluid interaction that
you see all around the iPhone OS.
And core animation talks
directly to the display hardware,
so it's some sort of the
iPhone windowing system.
So animation and compositing engine.
And so that's where everybody goes.
Everything goes to core animation.
That's the real power of the platform.
Now if you want to do 3D graphics,
so you have OpenGL,
OpenGL ES on the iPhone, and Eagle.
So Eagle is a new API specific
to the iPhone that makes the
connection between OpenGL ES render
content and core animation.
So OpenGL took directly to the graphics
hardware to be hardware accelerated to do
these very nice and very fast graphics.
So and then you have, for video playback,
you have the media player that
takes directly to the video
hardware for hardware accelerated
video playback and decompression.
So now let me focus on OpenGL ES.
So OpenGL ES is a high-performance
3D graphics API for embedded devices.
And feature-wise,
it's very close to OpenGL 1.5
fixed function pipeline,
so minus programmability on the desktop.
And OpenGL for hardware acceleration
uses the iPhone PowerVR NBX Live GPU,
which is a very powerful GPU for embedded
devices that maximize performance
while minimizing power consumption.
And to do that,
it uses two key technologies on that GPU,
which are the Tile-Based Deferred
Renderer and Hidden Surface Removal,
so TBDR and HSR.
And so what these technologies are, TBDR,
is that the renderer, so the iPhone,
the OpenGL context,
will be split into tiles.
And each of these tiles will process
the visible triangles and discard
the triangles that are hidden.
So this before rasterization.
And that makes it different from the
GPUs that you have on the desktop,
because, for instance,
some invisible triangle
will be discarded.
So saving rasterization
on these triangles,
and for instance, if a texture is hidden,
it will never get uploaded.
So that saves bandwidth,
that saves power,
and so that's a very powerful
technique on that particular GPU.
And so that's the
Hidden Surface Removal part.
And so the Deferred part means
that some things are going to be
decided only at the render phase,
for instance, texture uploads.
And so that means that if
you come to the desktop,
you might organize your OpenGL comment
stream in some different manner.
So we'll go in that section on
what it implies to be optimal on
embedded devices on that iPhone.
So Eagle is what connects the
OpenGL render content onto Core NMS.
And so Core NMS is
basically a core animation,
this iPhone composite windowing system.
And it's pretty much
equivalent to NSOpenGL,
CGL on the desktop, on the Mac desktop,
and other platforms.
And so it connects to Core NMS using
the framebuffer object extension
to connect the OpenGL render
content to Core NMS surfaces.
And so it's a new API on the iPhone,
but we made it very easy
for you to leverage,
so to get started in OpenGL ES.
So with a little bit of a break,
I'll just show you a
little bit of a demo.
So you have the Xcode template,
that is the
Cocoa Touch OpenGL application.
So you just open Xcode, create a new
Cocoa Touch OpenGL application,
and it sets everything up.
So you have on the Eagle side,
on the Core animation side.
And so you can get started
and start doing OpenGL code by
implementing the draw view method.
So by default, the template is drawing
a quad that is rotating.
So that's simple,
but that's great to get started
and to start writing some OpenGL.
So the next thing you want
to do in OpenGL is going to
be to bring in some assets,
some textures.
And so similarly,
we made it very easy to bring in some
textures using a texture 2D alpha
class that is shared among samples.
So it's used in Touchpadder,
it's used in the crash landing sample,
and it's very easy to create
a texture from an image path
or something in your resource,
in your project,
or including your project,
or from some data,
but also from CG images or
UI images from the system.
So it's very easy to create a
texture in OpenGL from the image file
and format that you already have.
Similarly, it's also easy to create a
texture containing a text
string using this alpha class.
You can create a string
with arbitrary font,
size, dimensions,
and then also very easy to draw
using some simple textures.
convenience methods that draw
in the current OpenGL context.
So the iPhone uses a
shared memory system,
so all applications and
OpenGL use the shared memory,
the same memory,
and as a consequence of that,
the memory limited to OpenGL,
so surface and texture,
is limited to 24 megabytes.
So you really need to only,
so it's very important to
only use the memory you need.
And so there's this great texture
compression format specific
to the GPU on the iPhone,
which is called PVRTC,
that we really recommend you choose.
It's really powerful,
and you can only win by
using PRTC compression.
So you win in performance,
you win in power conception,
you reduce the memory
bandwidth that you use,
and the memory footprint.
So you win on every side.
So it's really nice,
it's really powerful,
and so we recommend you to use that.
There is a texture tool,
a common line utility,
that allows you to convert main
known image file formats onto a
PVRTC compressed texture format.
And then there's also a simple
pixel format in texture.
So it's a texture tool that allows
you to create a texture to the object
from that compressed texture file.
But also you can look in the texture
to the source to know the OpenGL code.
It's also very simple,
just a GL text image line and parameter.
So really use PVRTC format texture.
So if you want to go further in OpenGL,
there are some very nice
sample applications that are
a great place to get started.
So GL Paint will allow you to connect
that with multi-touch to stretch your
fingers and to have it drawn in OpenGL.
And also Crash Landing,
which is a very nice and very simple
OpenGL ES-based game that leverages
Texture 2D following all the assets,
OpenAIL for sound,
and Accelerometer for control.
So it's a very simple application
that sets the things so
you can really follow them,
and it's a great place to get started
in OpenGL games on the iPhone.
So that's it for the assets.
So you have texture 2D that
helps you to load textures,
so the maximum texture size is 1K by 1K.
And so for 3D content,
what we did in TouchFader is to
use the existing exporters from
the 3D modelers that you have
to export into known formats,
vertices, and C file formats.
So you can import that in the game.
So you can use that.
Or you, game developer,
already have a pipeline,
a 3D pipeline in place.
So it should be very easy to pour
that pipeline onto the iPhone to
getting your 3D assets in the game.
So the iPhone uses a shared
memory system and 24 megabytes
of texture and surface memory.
And after loading texture,
because the memory is shared,
so deallocate -- don't keep
two copies of the same object.
So deallocate the copy
once you're on the GPU.
And that's coming soon.
And now some tips specific
to the PowerVR MBX Live GPU.
So as I said,
the PowerVR MBX Live GPU used
two technologies,
so tile-based deferred renderer
and hidden surface removal.
And so this requires that you
might want to organize your common
stream differently so that it makes
it easy for the GPU to render,
so more efficient.
And one thing you can do is
to draw first opaque geometry,
so the hidden surface removal thing can
work and disregard the good triangle,
and then blended geometry.
So there's lots of sorting you
can do to get optimal performance,
and that's one first sorting
that gives you good performance.
And then because everything is delayed,
for instance, texture uploads,
so it's some operation,
just like GL Text Subimage,
have the same performance
that GL Redpixel,
that depends on the
rendering destination.
So you should be careful on
that particular GPU of the
expense of these operations.
So GL Text Subimage, GL Redpixel,
all these operations that depends
on the render content are expensive.
And also, so avoid 2D state changes,
for instance,
viewport and caesars state changes.
So OpenGL ES is going to be the most
efficient way to do most of your work,
in particular compositing.
So really,
we recommend to use full screen
OpenGL context with-- so avoid to
go towards core animation to do
compositing when you don't have to,
when it's not needed.
So do the most compositing you can
in OpenGL for maximum performance,
in particular,
the landscape orientation in games,
if you want to do that net orientation,
do that within OpenGL,
so changing the metrics and
not using core animation.
So then again, use PVRTC and MIP maps,
which are pretty much a zero cost
performance-wise on that GPU,
just a little-- memory footprint,
but it's great for image
quality to have MIP maps using
that parameter in the game.
So other tips now specific to
OpenGL ES that also link to the
embedded world is to minimize
the number of state changes.
So eventually, consider sorting your
render objects per state.
So first,
running some objects in some model view,
so the blended objects, as we said.
So the object with lighting on,
with the depth testing on, and so on.
So to minimize the number
of call that you send to the
framework that have an overhead.
So sorting is a way to do it.
Another way to do it is another option
is also to a complementary option.
And so to consider caching the
current GL state in the code,
so to intercept it before it goes to the
framework so you can store the current
base address or the current vertex array,
the current bound texture,
that sort of thing.
And also, so you use a lot of vertex
array in OpenGL ES-based games.
So maximize the OpenGL,
the GL draw efficiency by minimizing the
number of draw records that you make.
And to do that, there are some tricks.
So you can use the general triangle
method to put multiple strips together
and to send them with one draw record.
And that's what we do in TouchFader
for all the particle system going on.
It's just one draw record when
they're the same color and so on.
So that's a big win.
And also, so use indices.
And so only leave the required state on,
in particular, lighting and blending,
because the fill rate is
something that you need to watch.
So use bending carefully to have the
hidden surface removal on the GPU.
That is not going to
work when blending is on.
And finally,
when you play a movie-- so a movie,
for instance, an x264 movie requires the
current frame to be present,
but also other frames.
So a lot of memory needs to be
allocated to play the movie optimally.
And so in that case,
if performance is an issue,
you might want to consider
releasing your GL objects and
eventually the whole GL context.
So before playing the
good scene in TouchFader,
we release everything to play the movie,
before playing the movie.
And now let me have a little
overview of how we organize that
within the TouchPattern source.
So can I please go onto this machine,
please?
Thank you,
so here we have the-- let me go
to application didFinishLaunching.
We have the application delegate
class that does all the work of
setting up and organizing the
big structural part of the game.
So in application didFinishLaunching,
we set up some properties
on the animation.
We create the window.
We set the background color.
We create the game view,
that is the open GLES base view
that will do all the main actions,
the main part of the game here.
So we add this as a subview.
Then we turn on multi-touch on that view.
We'll talk about that later.
So the big part is that we initialize the
timer that we call the gameLoot method
at a particular interval that you set.
Then we just start everything,
make the window visible.
So if we look at the game loop,
which is right up there,
so the game loop is simply
calling the game loop method,
associate game loop method,
on the game view,
and when the game is over,
it's calling this play movie method.
So if we go to this play movie method,
that's really the next part of the game.
Whenever you won,
the mothership had exploded,
and so you get into the exclusive
for movie playback part.
So we release the timer,
and eventually the network
timer in multiplayer.
We set the background color to white
color for good transition into the movie.
Then we release the view,
remove it from Super Viewer, release it.
We generate the high scores to store
the high scores while the movie plays.
Then we set up the end movie.
And very simply,
we can start the movie by calling
the play method on that movie.
So boom, and it plays.
And associate to the end movie
playback didFinishNotification,
a selector that would be called
whenever the movie stopped
playing so we can go into the
full screen into the high scores.
So if I go to the movie
ended method here,
so this movie ended
method creates an image,
a UI image view from these little Winner
don't use drugs screens that we show
up here with just these four lines.
And then we add -- we
also show the high scores,
so we add it as a sub view,
but these high scores are actually
not visible at this current time.
They're outside the main display,
the main rectangle of the display.
So what we do in these high scores,
here we implement the touches began
method that whenever we tap the screen,
we'll create this background
view with the sheep rotating,
so open GLES view,
and we'll begin an animation
to bring everything on display.
So in the current rectangle,
visible rectangle.
Then we create this view that
allows you to enter your name
whenever you are in the high scores.
good enough player in Touch Fighter.
So now let's have a simple
peek at the main 3D view,
the game view.
So here in the initWithFrame method,
we allocate all the necessary objects
and set the associated OpenGL state.
So here we set the lights, the lighting,
then we create all the
textures using texture2Ds.
We set some parameters.
We set the cameras.
We create the star field.
So we create the cube map here.
So PVR4 on the iPhone
and PNG on the simulator.
Then we create the little nice planet.
So all these resources are located here.
We set them.
We allocate.
We create them.
We set the position, velocity scale.
So the same for everything.
So here the enemies and-- so
here the enemy is a spaceship.
So we also create the
accelerometer instance.
That would get us the
accelerometer data here.
Set the smoothing and sensitivity values.
The gestures.
And then we--
So we restore the NSUserDefault
that stores the settings pane.
And then we have the UpdateScene method
that updates whatever needs to be
updated to the position of the objects.
And then the RenderScene method that
renders using OpenGL all these objects.
And all these UpdateScene and
RenderScene methods are called through
the GameLoop method in the view,
so we can have the rendering on and off.
So these are the key and
core elements of TouchWriter.
So let me go back to slides, please.
Okay,
so that was the TouchHunter 2 code tour.
So you really see the
big elements of the game.
It's pretty simple to get all that
things together thanks to Core Animation,
which makes it very easy to bring in any
kind of content in the same application.
So you don't have to
choose one technology.
You can bring them all
together smoothly and animated.
And so it's a very powerful
part of the iPhone.
In particular,
it's very easy to bring UI key controls.
So you can use programmatically.
You can create other views and so on,
just like you're used to do.
But so you can bring them in.
It's very nice to bring in
native UI inside a game.
But also you can design your
UI in an interface builder.
For instance, the settings pane,
that's what we do.
It's just a Nib file.
The high score, the same thing.
It's a Nib file.
So just in one line,
we can create a UI view
from that Nib file.
And bring it into the game.
So if you want to animate it,
we simply add this view,
add a subview of a current
application window.
And we begin an animation and set
it from a point outside the display
to a point inside the display.
And in four lines, we have some Nib file
coming into the game.
So as we said before,
this sort of compositing
might be an issue.
So if you have expensive rendering,
you might want to pause
it or that sort of things.
Or reduce it or be aware of it at least.
So that's really nice.
And then to play movies.
So playing movies.
So movies play full screen.
They take the whole display.
You can set some properties
on how the scaling is made.
And if you want some
HUD display and so on.
And it's great to enhance
the visual quality of a game.
To punctuate the cutscenes,
the big start screen, the end screens.
And so on.
To really add some very nice
visual content and create an
engaging experience in games.
So that's really nice.
And so very easy to bring
in a movie in a game.
You simply create a mpmovieplayer
controller instance from a URL.
And then you can set optional
properties on that instance.
And then you need to listen to the
mpmovieplayback.didfinish notification.
So that your current application is
called whenever the movie stops playing.
So it can start up whenever you were.
And then you just need to call
the play method on that instance.
And boom, the movie starts playing.
Start playing full screen.
And that's as easy as it can be.
When that's done,
so the callback will be called
once the movie starts playing.
So you can start up your pngel context,
your 3D content,
or whatever you want to start up again.
So lots of sessions on graphics
on the iPhone today and tomorrow,
3D, 2D, graphics animation,
control views,
and video delivery on the iPhone that
we recommend you to go check out.
So these are a great complement
of that current session.
So now let me talk about inputs.
So the iPhone is a fantastic platform
because it has this unique way of
getting data and of controlling a game,
of getting data into a game,
and of controlling the game.
In particular, multi-touch.
So multi-touch is great.
So it's super intuitive.
So you can really touch the action
when it happens on the screen.
You can move objects on the
display directly in the game.
So you can also create some new ways,
some new hot zones, or some new controls.
For instance, you type on the right,
and it fires from the right,
that sort of thing.
So you don't need-- you can
bypass the usual controllers.
And that's very intuitive.
That's very nice.
Another thing you can do with
multi-touch are gestures.
And so gesture is the evolution,
so the trajectory of
the finger over time.
And so that's very nice for
games because you can actually
create some special moves.
For instance,
let's imagine in a golf game,
you can just describe the swing
and how accurate the swing is,
how good the swing is
going to be in the game.
You can do some punches
in some boxing game.
And that's other things.
And you can also use the gesture
that you're already familiar with,
for instance, swipes and rotates,
as we did in Touch Fire,
to throw some special weapons,
like missiles and so on.
So let me--
So main concepts in multi-touch,
so an event and a touch.
So an event is shared over the
application and among all the
views in the current application.
And they contain all the information
on the current touch event going on.
So they contain all the touch
instances of the current event.
So the touch is contained
within an event,
contain the information
on a particular finger.
So the location, the phase,
the number of taps, and the timestamp.
So how to get multi-touch in your game?
So first on the view,
to get it in the view,
you set the multi-touch enable
methods to yes on that view.
And then the touches begin, touches move,
and touches ended methods of
UI Responder will be called whenever
the phase of the current event,
so touch event, is changing.
So it allows you to follow
the event over time.
And so the event will always
contain all the touches,
and the first argument of these touches
began will be a set that contains
the subset of these touches of the
event that match the particular phase.
So let's say I start touching the screen,
so the touch began will be called
with a set of the first touch,
and as the first argument and
the event containing that touch,
I touch the screen a second time,
and the touch will be called.
So the touches began will be
called with first argument,
this only second finger,
and the event containing the two fingers.
And when I move the screen,
the touches move will be
called with both two fingers on
both arguments of the method.
So you get the idea.
So it's really easy to get some
multi-touch into a game and to
start creating some interesting
interaction with a game.
So if you want to now do gestures.
So to do gestures,
you need to connect the current
touch with the previous touch to
create some trajectories and to
understand the trajectories of
that trajectory evolve over time.
And so to do that, so it's very easy.
You get the touch instance from
the current set to your method,
and you get this location.
And then to connect that location
to the previous location.
So there's similarly this
previous location in view method
that allows you to connect it.
Or you can similarly simply keep a
cache of the current touch instances,
current touch objects,
because they will remain the
same all around the event.
So the touch object will remain the
same per finger all along touch events.
You can track it that way.
So it's pretty easy to get this.
And so to do that, you can connect these
gestures into a game.
And so to go further,
there are these sample applications,
which are great.
Touches for multi-touch tracking.
So it's very nice.
It allows you to follow and
understand whatever touch things
you're doing correspond to what
phase and what method gets called.
And so it shows that to you
in a HUD on the application.
So the moveme tracks a view
and do some animations.
It's nice.
So in TouchFader,
we did some lot of work to analyze
gestures and map them to known
swipes and rotates and so on.
In particular, in the gesture class in
the TouchFader source,
you can get the gesture type
as soon as it's recognized.
So it can be a swipe or rotate.
And it's going to tell you the angle.
So absolute,
complete angle and the center.
So you can really start doing
some nice things from there.
And in particular,
you can build from there to
create and to analyze more complex
gesture or texture that you like.
So that's it for multi-touch.
Now, let me talk about accelerometer.
So accelerometer,
it's a fantastic controller.
It's a fantastic way to control
the game because it's so natural.
In Touch Fighter,
you can just move around
to steer the ship,
but in a racing game,
you can also throttle and brake.
In a boxing game,
you can swing and punch,
that sort of things.
And it's very intuitive
and it's very nice.
It's just you do something and
you have immediately the effect
in the game and you understand
what's going on right away.
So it's a very powerful
way to control a game.
You can use that as a controller,
but you can also use that as a way
to design some unique input method.
For instance, you can flip to jump or
shake to reload again,
that sort of thing.
So it's really nice.
The accelerometer data is
three-axis information that you get,
which is the current orientation,
the vector of the current
acceleration on the phone.
It's stored in a UI acceleration
instances with three
read-only properties,
X, Y, Z.
And so that's pretty simple to get
information on what the current
acceleration is in your game to start
using that as a way to control it.
So first, you send the delegate method on
shared accelerometer instance to
your class that will get called.
So the accelerometer didAccelerate
method will be called on that class
at an interval that you can choose by
sending the updateInterval property
on the shared accelerometer instance.
So the accelerometer didAccelerate
method will be called at this
frequency and will contain,
as the second argument,
the current acceleration,
so your acceleration that you
can query for the xyz value.
So to go further,
there's some great sample,
in particular the accelerometer graph,
that tells you and allows you to
understand what the accelerometer sees,
what the accelerometer doesn't see.
In particular,
it's doing a graph of XYZ values
of the current acceleration.
And so in particular,
you'll see that the acceleration
is invariant as you rotate
around the current acceleration.
So that sort of motion will not
be seen by the accelerometer.
Other things, so, I mean,
game developers know
always lots of its physics.
But, so, it's going to be pretty trivial,
but if you move at constant velocity,
so acceleration is constant,
so it's not going to change in
constant velocity displacements.
So something that you can see by
playing with this accelerometer graph,
a sample application.
Another simple sample application,
which weighs up,
shows you how to connect accelerometer
values to orientation on the UI.
Okay, and so in Touch Fatter,
we did a lot of work to get
accelerometer as a controller right.
So in particular,
so accelerometer gives you
raw value of the acceleration.
And so to get a very smooth
control in your game,
you need to find the good compromise
between smoothing and responsiveness.
And so that means that you want to smooth
the data to get some smooth interaction,
but too much smoothing will
make it less responsive.
So what we did,
the solution we found in Touch Fatter
was to do a little bit of smoothing,
but also some noise reduction,
some signal processing very targeted at
noise reduction to get this very nice,
smooth, yet responsive control and
interaction with the game.
So it's really nice.
There's this accelerometer
smoother class.
We did a lot of work there,
so we encourage you to have a look.
It feels really nice
when you play the game.
So you have three
properties on this class.
In Touch Fatter,
that tells you the position,
allows you to calibrate
as we discuss in a second,
also allows you to control the
smoothing and the sensitivity
of the current acceleration.
So some other thing we learned
while doing this work in TouchFaller
is that because the accelerometer
callback might be in the main thread,
and this main thread will
be the thread where you're
going to do the geo-rendering,
and in an expensive game,
this geo-rendering might
take a lot of time.
So even if you ask for a very high
frequency of the accelerometer callback,
they might not come as
often as you expect them.
And so that's an issue in
particular when you want to do
some smoothing and want some signal
processing where the sampling rate,
the fact that the
sampling rate is regular,
is very important.
So you can find your
own solutions to that.
The solution we found was to
actually do the signal processing
and do the smoothing from whatever
is regular in the current game,
and that's the geo-rendering loop.
So doing that smoothing
in the geo-rendering loop,
so in whatever is expensive
in the current situation,
allowed to bypass and to avoid
some... Some jitter and some
irregular motion in the control.
So again, Chirag,
the TouchFaller source for
smoothing and noise reduction
example using accelerometer data.
OK, so another thing I show you in the
demo is-- so it's very nice to be able
to give the gamers the ability to,
as they wish, while playing the game,
to change their default position.
So you can start the game
by playing like that,
and you might want to sit down and
to then continue playing the game
with that sort of inclination.
So how do you give the gamers the
option to do that calibration?
And so that's really up to you.
So that really depends on the
user case scenario that you have.
You might be in a game when you
want to force the user to hold
the iPhone parallel to the floor,
and so to create some analogy
between the iPhone and the ground.
But you might want to give the option
to do this sort of recalibration.
So some options, you can use three-finger
tap to automatically
recalibrate whenever -- well,
to recalibrate whenever you
do the three-finger tap.
So in TouchFader,
we do this technique that
detects whenever the player
is in some outer region,
so outside the screen for some time,
so statically over there for some time,
so with low variance in the movement.
We say, well, that's likely to be the new
position the player is in,
and so we use that as a
new center of movement.
And so that works really nice.
So that's also something that you
might want to have a look at if
it makes sense to your scenario.
But we find out that
it works really nice.
So that's what we do.
But again,
so there's no universal answer.
It's a case-by-case kind of problem,
but it's nice to keep that in mind.
So more on multi-touch and accelerometer.
in these sessions on
Wednesday and Thursday.
So now let me talk about audio.
So the iPhone is a great iPod,
and the sound quality is really nice.
And so it's great to be able
to leverage that in the game.
So Core Audio and Audio Toolbox
are the place to start to
bringing sound in a game.
So that's a primary API for
audio playback on the iPhone,
and it's a C front-end that takes
directly to the audio hardware for
optimal sound quality and decompression.
So Core Audio has several APIs,
and so you need to choose
exactly what makes sense to
what you want to do in the game.
So there's this very simple
API called Audio Services that
allows you to play short sounds.
So it's not for everything.
It's really for some
punctual sounds in some UI,
some beeps and boops.
So not really for mixing,
but that's very easy to
leverage to start up with.
Then there's Audio Queue
Services that allow you to play
longer sound and compressed sounds.
And so that's nice because it
automatically loads chunks in memory,
so you don't have the whole
source file in memory at once.
And also for recording audio and
playing stream audio content.
So now,
what if you want to do some sound mixing,
and even better, some 3D sound mixing?
So for that, there is OpenAL.
OpenAL is just a line here,
but it's really nice.
It's really big.
So OpenAL allows you to do
3D specialized sound mixing.
And what is very nice with OpenAL is
that it's going to share the
same coordinate system as OpenGL.
So it's very easy for you
OpenGL developer to transfer
and to go from OpenGL to OpenAL.
You simply associate to the position
in your referential of your 3D object a
sound with the same coordinate or close
coordinate in the OpenAL referential.
And then boom, from now on,
you have a 3D specialized game.
And you know how this sort of audio
richness of immersion can really add to
the already very rich experience that you
have with the graphics API on the iPhone.
So OpenAL is there.
It's on the phone.
So you heard in touch, amazing it sounds.
It's really nice.
So OpenAL is there on the
phone without audio capture.
So OpenAL 1.1.
So you can bring it in.
You can bring your existing
OpenAL code on the iPhone and it
should work just as you expected.
But we made it easy to leverage
OpenAL in a game by providing you
with a simple OpenAL interface,
soundengine.h and cpp that
is shared among samples.
So crash landing and touch
fatter use that engine.
And it's a wrapper over OpenAL and
an audio toolbox to play 3D
positional sound and mix.
So you can play mixing
with simple methods,
simple functions.
Load effect, set effect position,
start effect and boom,
you have your effect playing
in space and being specialized.
Also, you have background audio track
support to load background music,
so compressed audio or compressed audio
as a background track in the game.
So we have an Objective-C wrapper
in TouchFader that does a simple,
very thin wrapper over that API to set
position and really maps and associate.
It maps very well with the 3D
objects that we have in the game.
So some notes about audio.
So depending on the
requirement that you have,
you might want to choose
a good compromise between
performance and quality.
In particular, in 3D expensive games,
you might want to get a sampling rate
that requires a lot of CPU for the game,
for the current configuration.
For instance, in Touch Fader,
with all the sounds going on,
so 22K might be a good compromise
to get a great sound quality
while having great performance.
So in some of the games, you might want,
because graphic is cheap,
you might think that it's
fine to bump up to 44K,
and that's perfect.
So that really depends
on the user scenario,
on the expensiveness of the other
things going on in the game.
So think about sampling rate there.
So but one thing that is
important is to avoid mixing
different sampling rate together,
because this will produce or
incur some extra conversion
step between the sampling rate,
which is a cost that you want to avoid.
So you can play multiple
compressed files and mix them,
but the hardware can only play one
compressed audio file at a time.
So if you try to play multiple
compressed audio files,
they will either play in
software if there is a software
decoder or not play at all.
So keep that in mind and consider using
compressed sound files in some cases,
in these cases.
So now more about audio right
after this session in Procedio,
Audio Development for the iPhone.
And so the lab is coming
on Wednesday also where you
can ask all your questions.
[Transcript missing]
So yeah, so it's a great place.
So that's for these host multiple client,
multiple conversion.
But it's very easy to start from
this sample source and to build
whatever network configuration
that makes sense to your game.
So it's a great place to have
a first look at how you can
do networking on the iPhone.
So some notes on networking.
So the name of the device in
Bonjour are the device names.
And the device names are the device
name that you choose in iTunes that
you associate with your iPhone.
So if you want to do some multiplayer,
you might change that from my
iPhone to something more personal.
And so there is the system
configuration framework that allows
you to know what network is available.
So Edge or Wi-Fi or not 3G.
So there is a sample application
called Net Reachability that allows
you to get that information and
to see how you can do that and
how you can get that information.
So, and similarly,
you can -- the sample source is a great
place to start if you want to create
peer-to-peer or other sort of networks.
So there is this great thing in
Objective-C that allows you to,
when you are in a game,
that allows you to send
data over a connection.
So when you're in a game, in Objective-C,
you might have objects
with a set of properties,
and so you have your Objective-C object.
And what would you like to
do is to send that object,
all that information
associated with that object,
over a connection so that other clients
can get exactly the same object.
And so if you make your
object conform to NSCoding,
simply by implementing these two methods,
encodeWithCoder and intWithCoder,
you have then an easy way to
send your object data to your
custom objects over a connection.
So just with this method, ArchiveData,
with root object,
you can get an NSData object
from that Objective-C object,
send it on the connection,
and then on the other side,
we construct the object
very transparently.
So it's very nice to get an object
on both sides of the connection.
So allow that.
And then we have this
Objective-C NSCoding protocol.
So for an example on that,
you can check the touchpad or source.
So that's what we do to send information.
And that's it.
So another thing is that the
NSArray and lots of Objective-C objects
already NSCoding compliant,
so you can easily leverage that to send
complex structures over the network.
So now let's talk about location.
So as Allan mentioned,
the iPhone knows where you are.
And so what it means is that it opens the
door to location-aware multiplayer games.
And that's really big.
And that's an area that is still
getting -- that is very hot right now,
that is getting explored.
So there's lots of things that
are very exciting in that domain.
So the iPhone can create a
Wi-Fi tower and cell phone tower
and a GPS to your current location.
And then it gets this approximate.
And so when you're in your network,
so you know all your clients
and hosts in your game,
so configure, you can then put these
locations in relation,
the one to the other,
to know who's close, to know who's far,
and to eventually create some
interaction with the people
around you in the physical world.
So Core Location is the API,
the framework that you need to get
an estimate on the current location.
It tells you altitude, longitude,
and altitude.
And so on the iPhone,
it's very important to use Core Location,
and Core Location allows you to do
that to only get the estimate that
you need so that you can minimize
the battery that you require,
so the number of cell towers that you
will query to get your current estimate.
So to get location,
you configure the distance.
So you create a
co-location manager object.
And then you set the distance
filter and design accuracy
properties on that instance.
And so the distance filter say,
how much do I need to move before
my current location is invalidated?
And the desired accuracy say,
how accurate I want that estimate to be.
So then you call the start updating
location method and the start
updating location method to start
getting an estimate and then stop
whenever the estimate is good enough.
So it's very important to set
that parameters right so that
you do not require too much power
for the information you need.
If you want some broad,
I want to know in what city I am in,
so configure that properly so
that you don't require too much.
So to know more about
location and accelerometer,
so there is this presidio session
on accelerometer and location,
so tomorrow, and so we encourage
you to go check it out.
So now we're going to do a demo
of Multiplayer in Touchpad.
So we build over these game
classes that allows you to see
how it works and to try out.
And it works very nice,
so we thought we would make you a demo.
So can I go on the demo unit, please?
So, and what we have here, we have Allan,
who has an iPhone here,
and he's on the same network in here.
So I can just start here
having a multiplayer game,
and I'm going to host a game,
and Allan's going to join the game.
So you have this very nice UI when I can
change my shape and it follows my finger,
just like in CoverFlow,
so it's really nice.
So I can swipe and send
these people around.
So Allan joined the game,
and so I was selecting a little early.
So you can see that
Allan is moving around,
so that's Allan in front of me here,
who is moving and playing
with his iPhone here.
And so I can see he's firing,
and he can send missiles too, and...
Here we go, they're sending missiles.
And so the whole game
state is sent in real time,
in background, to Allan Schaffer.
So he sees exactly the
same thing as Anthony.
So it's really nice to
do some multi-tayer.
You can start playing together and
eventually compare the scores and see
how much he's winning and how much he's
killing more ships than me and so on.
So here the whole thing is going on.
So he sees the same thing, the explosion,
all that stuff is transferred.
And yeah.
and you see all that
stuff going on over wi-fi
Okay.
So yeah.
Thank you.
So that was Touchpad or Multiplayer.
And so before asking
Allan to come on stage,
I really want to give you my final words,
which are that I can't wait to
see what you guys are going to do,
because the possibilities
are really there,
and the features are really there.
And so there's a lot of
innovation going on in Gameplay,
and I can't wait to see
what's going to happen.
It's going to be really exciting.
All right.
Well, so over the past few months
during the beta period,
I've been getting a lot of
questions from all of you about
some device-specific issues.
And so what I've compiled is just a quick
FAQ of a few of the things that just
seem to be questions from everybody.
These are not specific to
game development at all,
and they're going to be covered
in other sessions during the show.
But I will go ahead and
go into a few of them.
So first,
what should you do if you're running
on an iPhone and a call comes in?
Well,
what the user is going to be presented
with is a screen that comes up over
your game where they're given the
option to decline or answer the call.
When that screen appears,
a particular UI application
delegate is going to fire.
You see it here.
It's the application will
resign active delegate.
And that's when you should
probably pause your game.
Just the user isn't going
to be able to get to it.
And they're deciding,
they're seeing who's calling them.
Now, if they take the call,
your application is
going to be terminated.
Before that happens,
you have just a few moments in this
application will terminate delegate
method to save off your game state and
do anything you want to do for the next
time the user comes back into your game.
Now, if the user declines the call,
now your game is back in active again.
And so you get a notification
of application did become.
And that's where you should
probably resume your game was
just paused in the meantime.
And so you would do some sort
of game specific behavior there.
Maybe you want to restart the level.
Maybe you just put them, you know,
let them hit a continue button.
You know, it's something specific to
how you would implement that.
A question I get a lot is,
where can I save high scores?
So the issue is that application data
on the iPhone and on the iPhone OS is
sandboxed to your application bundle.
And so only your application
can access its data,
resources, and other things from its
documents folder and so on.
You don't have the ability, for example,
to reach over into another application's
resources to read their high scores,
and nor is there a centralized
location on the iPhone for
you to just store stuff to.
And so there's a simple approach, though,
and it has to do with the NSUserDefaults,
which is something you typically
can use for preferences,
but it works great for this.
And it has just a setObjectForKey
and then objectForKeyRetrieval
method to be able to just
get and set your high scores.
Now, if you're doing something
a little more complex,
you want to be able to have
global high scores from all of
your users all over the Internet,
that's a custom implementation.
You're going to have to somehow
connect over the network
to a server that you host.
Maybe you would have it
come through a web page.
Maybe you would connect directly
through the CF network code.
That would be your choice.
A couple of things about the status bar.
So typically in a full-screen game,
you want to hide the
status bar or change it,
or you want to change its orientation.
And so all of these things can be
controlled by the Info.plist that's
associated with your application.
And these are just different settings.
So the status bar hidden,
set that to yes if you want to hide it.
You can set it from the default,
which is the sort of a gray color,
to black translucent if most of your
games have a black translucent color.
Same colors are dark.
Or you can orient it to landscape mode.
In this case, landscape right for
landscape orientation.
Two more things.
If you want to customize the
launch image of your application,
and so what that is is when an
iPhone application first launches,
it displays an image while
your application state is all
being initialized and so on.
And the name of that file
is just default.ping.
If you have that in the top
level of your application bundle,
that's what's going to be shown
while all your game state is loading.
Now, you probably want the contents of
that default.ping to be something
like the 0% appearance of your loading
screen or just something that shows,
okay, you know,
the game is now firing up.
And last,
an issue that comes up if you're
holding the iPhone and using
just the accelerometer for input,
maybe you're never actually
touching the screen.
And touching the screen
is what keeps it awake.
And so there needs to be some
way for you to tell the iPhone,
the SDK, I still want to keep awake even
if I'm not touching anything.
And this is how you can do that.
It's just a method on the shared
application object to disable this timer.
All right.
So that's actually my email address.
You're going to see
that all over the show.
But so we've given you kind
of a lot of homework here.
You know, you saw this.
There's a lot of Touch Fighter source
that we've shown you.
We've told you go look at that code.
You know, so come, go do that tonight,
you know, after the parties, of course,
and then come to the lab tomorrow.
And we'd be happy to
take questions there.